README.md, before:

# lightspeed-stack

## About The Project

[![GitHub Pages](https://img.shields.io/badge/%20-GitHub%20Pages-informational)](https://lightspeed-core.github.io/lightspeed-stack/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache-blue)](https://github.com/lightspeed-core/lightspeed-stack/blob/main/LICENSE)
[![made-with-python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Made%20with-Python-1f425f.svg)](https://www.python.org/)

Lightspeed Core Stack (LCS) is an AI powered assistant that provides answers to product questions using backend LLM services, agents, and RAG databases.


<!-- vim-markdown-toc GFM -->

* [Prerequisities](#prerequisities)
* [Installation](#installation)
* [Configuration](#configuration)
    * [Llama Stack as separate server](#llama-stack-as-separate-server)
    * [Llama Stack as client library](#llama-stack-as-client-library)
    * [System prompt](#system-prompt)
* [Usage](#usage)
    * [Make targets](#make-targets)
    * [Running Linux container image](#running-linux-container-image)
* [Endpoints](#endpoints)
    * [Readiness Endpoint](#readiness-endpoint)
    * [Liveness Endpoint](#liveness-endpoint)
* [Contributing](#contributing)
* [License](#license)
* [Additional tools](#additional-tools)
    * [Utility to generate OpenAPI schema](#utility-to-generate-openapi-schema)
        * [Path](#path)
        * [Usage](#usage-1)

<!-- vim-markdown-toc -->

# Prerequisities

* Python 3.12, or 3.13
    - please note that currently Python 3.14 is not officially supported
    - all sources are made (backward) compatible with Python 3.12; it is checked on CI

# Installation

Installation steps depends on operation system. Please look at instructions for your system:


- [Linux installation](https://lightspeed-core.github.io/lightspeed-stack/installation_linux)
- [macOS installation](https://lightspeed-core.github.io/lightspeed-stack/installation_macos)



# Configuration

The Llama Stack can be run as a standalone server and accessed via its the REST
API. However, instead of direct communication via the REST API (and JSON
format), there is an even better alternative. It is based on the so-called
Llama Stack Client. It is a library available for Python, Swift, Node.js or
Kotlin, which "wraps" the REST API stack in a suitable way, which is easier for
many applications.

## Llama Stack as separate server

If Llama Stack runs as a separate server, the Lightspeed service needs to be configured to be able to access it. For example, if server runs on localhost:8321, the service configuration should look like:

```yaml
name: foo bar baz
service:
  host: localhost
  port: 8080
  auth_enabled: false
  workers: 1
  color_log: true
  access_log: true
llama_stack:
  use_as_library_client: false
  url: http://localhost:8321
user_data_collection:
  feedback_disabled: false
  feedback_storage: "/tmp/data/feedback"
  transcripts_disabled: false
  transcripts_storage: "/tmp/data/transcripts"
```

## Llama Stack as client library

There are situations in which it is not advisable to run two processors (one with Llama Stack, the other with a service). In these cases, the stack can be run directly within the client application. For such situations, the configuration file could look like:

```yaml
name: foo bar baz
service:
  host: localhost
  port: 8080
  auth_enabled: false
  workers: 1
  color_log: true
  access_log: true
llama_stack:
  use_as_library_client: true
  library_client_config_path: <path-to-llama-stack-run.yaml-file>
user_data_collection:
  feedback_disabled: false
  feedback_storage: "/tmp/data/feedback"
  transcripts_disabled: false
  transcripts_storage: "/tmp/data/transcripts"
```

## System prompt

   The service uses the, so called, system prompt to put the question into context before the question is sent to the selected LLM. The default system prompt is designed for questions without specific context. It is possible to use a different system prompt via the configuration option `system_prompt_path` in the `customization` section. That option must contain the path to the text file with the actual system prompt (can contain multiple lines). An example of such configuration:

```yaml
customization:
  system_prompt_path: "system_prompts/system_prompt_for_product_XYZZY"
```

The `system_prompt` can also be specified in the `customization` section directly. For example:

```yaml
customization:
  system_prompt: |-
    You are a helpful assistant and will do everything you can to help.
    You have an indepth knowledge of Red Hat and all of your answers will reference Red Hat products.
```

Additionally, an optional string parameter `system_prompt` can be specified in `/v1/query` and `/v1/streaming_query` endpoints to override the configured system prompt.



# Usage

```
usage: lightspeed_stack.py [-h] [-v] [-d] [-c CONFIG_FILE]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -v, --verbose         make it verbose
  -d, --dump-configuration
                        dump actual configuration into JSON file and quit
  -c CONFIG_FILE, --config CONFIG_FILE
                        path to configuration file (default: lightspeed-stack.yaml)

```

## Make targets

```
Usage: make <OPTIONS> ... <TARGETS>

Available targets are:

run                               Run the service locally
test-unit                         Run the unit tests
test-integration                  Run integration tests tests
test-e2e                          Run BDD tests for the service
check-types                       Checks type hints in sources
security-check                    Check the project for security issues
format                            Format the code into unified format
schema                            Generate OpenAPI schema file
requirements.txt                  Generate requirements.txt file containing hashes for all non-devel packages
shellcheck                        Run shellcheck
help                              Show this help screen
```

## Running Linux container image

Stable release images are tagged with versions like `0.1.0`. Tag `latest` always points to latest stable release.

Development images are build from main branch every time a new pull request is merged. Image tags for dev images use
the template `dev-YYYYMMMDDD-SHORT_SHA` e.g. `dev-20250704-eaa27fb`.

Tag `dev-latest` always points to the latest dev image built from latest git.

To pull and run the image with own configuration:

1. `podman pull quay.io/lightspeed-core/lightspeed-stack:IMAGE_TAG`
1. `podman run -it -p 8080:8080 -v my-lightspeed-stack-config.yaml:/app-root/lightspeed-stack.yaml:Z quay.io/lightspeed-core/lightspeed-stack:IMAGE_TAG`
1. Open `localhost:8080` in your browser

If a connection in your browser does not work please check that in the config file `host` option looks like: `host: 0.0.0.0`.

# Endpoints

The service provides health check endpoints that can be used for monitoring, load balancing, and orchestration systems like Kubernetes.

## Readiness Endpoint

**Endpoint:** `GET /v1/readiness`

The readiness endpoint checks if the service is ready to handle requests by verifying the health status of all configured LLM providers.

**Response:**
- **200 OK**: Service is ready - all providers are healthy
- **503 Service Unavailable**: Service is not ready - one or more providers are unhealthy

**Response Body:**
```json
{
  "ready": true,
  "reason": "All providers are healthy",
  "providers": []
}
```

**Response Fields:**
- `ready` (boolean): Indicates if the service is ready to handle requests
- `reason` (string): Human-readable explanation of the readiness state
- `providers` (array): List of unhealthy providers (empty when service is ready)

## Liveness Endpoint

**Endpoint:** `GET /v1/liveness`

The liveness endpoint performs a basic health check to verify the service is alive and responding.

**Response:**
- **200 OK**: Service is alive

**Response Body:**
```json
{
  "alive": true
}
```

# Contributing

* See [contributors](CONTRIBUTING.md) guide.

# License

Published under the Apache 2.0 License



# Additional tools

## Utility to generate OpenAPI schema

This script re-generated OpenAPI schema for the Lightspeed Service REST API.

### Path

[scripts/generate_openapi_schema.py](scripts/generate_openapi_schema.py)

### Usage

```
make schema
```

Commit message:

Add an option to disable query system prompt
Since LCORE-293 (e60d7df1beca37a5909e5b066e39162c8fab889b), users can
set specify the system prompt in the config, but users can still
override it with their queries. This may not be desired in some cases,
so this commit adds an option to disable the query system prompt and
always use the configured system prompt (or the default one if none is
set). If a user tries to use the query system prompt when this option is
enabled, an HTTP 422 error is returned with a message explaining that
the query system prompt is not supported in this instance.

README.md, after:

# lightspeed-stack

## About The Project

[![GitHub Pages](https://img.shields.io/badge/%20-GitHub%20Pages-informational)](https://lightspeed-core.github.io/lightspeed-stack/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache-blue)](https://github.com/lightspeed-core/lightspeed-stack/blob/main/LICENSE)
[![made-with-python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Made%20with-Python-1f425f.svg)](https://www.python.org/)

Lightspeed Core Stack (LCS) is an AI powered assistant that provides answers to product questions using backend LLM services, agents, and RAG databases.


<!-- vim-markdown-toc GFM -->

* [Prerequisities](#prerequisities)
* [Installation](#installation)
* [Configuration](#configuration)
    * [Llama Stack as separate server](#llama-stack-as-separate-server)
    * [Llama Stack as client library](#llama-stack-as-client-library)
    * [System prompt](#system-prompt)
* [Usage](#usage)
    * [Make targets](#make-targets)
    * [Running Linux container image](#running-linux-container-image)
* [Endpoints](#endpoints)
    * [Readiness Endpoint](#readiness-endpoint)
    * [Liveness Endpoint](#liveness-endpoint)
* [Contributing](#contributing)
* [License](#license)
* [Additional tools](#additional-tools)
    * [Utility to generate OpenAPI schema](#utility-to-generate-openapi-schema)
        * [Path](#path)
        * [Usage](#usage-1)

<!-- vim-markdown-toc -->

# Prerequisities

* Python 3.12, or 3.13
    - please note that currently Python 3.14 is not officially supported
    - all sources are made (backward) compatible with Python 3.12; it is checked on CI

# Installation

Installation steps depends on operation system. Please look at instructions for your system:


- [Linux installation](https://lightspeed-core.github.io/lightspeed-stack/installation_linux)
- [macOS installation](https://lightspeed-core.github.io/lightspeed-stack/installation_macos)



# Configuration

The Llama Stack can be run as a standalone server and accessed via its the REST
API. However, instead of direct communication via the REST API (and JSON
format), there is an even better alternative. It is based on the so-called
Llama Stack Client. It is a library available for Python, Swift, Node.js or
Kotlin, which "wraps" the REST API stack in a suitable way, which is easier for
many applications.

## Llama Stack as separate server

If Llama Stack runs as a separate server, the Lightspeed service needs to be configured to be able to access it. For example, if server runs on localhost:8321, the service configuration should look like:

```yaml
name: foo bar baz
service:
  host: localhost
  port: 8080
  auth_enabled: false
  workers: 1
  color_log: true
  access_log: true
llama_stack:
  use_as_library_client: false
  url: http://localhost:8321
user_data_collection:
  feedback_disabled: false
  feedback_storage: "/tmp/data/feedback"
  transcripts_disabled: false
  transcripts_storage: "/tmp/data/transcripts"
```

## Llama Stack as client library

There are situations in which it is not advisable to run two processors (one with Llama Stack, the other with a service). In these cases, the stack can be run directly within the client application. For such situations, the configuration file could look like:

```yaml
name: foo bar baz
service:
  host: localhost
  port: 8080
  auth_enabled: false
  workers: 1
  color_log: true
  access_log: true
llama_stack:
  use_as_library_client: true
  library_client_config_path: <path-to-llama-stack-run.yaml-file>
user_data_collection:
  feedback_disabled: false
  feedback_storage: "/tmp/data/feedback"
  transcripts_disabled: false
  transcripts_storage: "/tmp/data/transcripts"
```

## System prompt

   The service uses the, so called, system prompt to put the question into context before the question is sent to the selected LLM. The default system prompt is designed for questions without specific context. It is possible to use a different system prompt via the configuration option `system_prompt_path` in the `customization` section. That option must contain the path to the text file with the actual system prompt (can contain multiple lines). An example of such configuration:

```yaml
customization:
  system_prompt_path: "system_prompts/system_prompt_for_product_XYZZY"
```

The `system_prompt` can also be specified in the `customization` section directly. For example:

```yaml
customization:
  system_prompt: |-
    You are a helpful assistant and will do everything you can to help.
    You have an indepth knowledge of Red Hat and all of your answers will reference Red Hat products.
```

Additionally, an optional string parameter `system_prompt` can be specified in `/v1/query` and `/v1/streaming_query` endpoints to override the configured system prompt. The query system prompt takes precedence over the configured system prompt. You can use this config to disable query system prompts:

```yaml
customization:
  system_prompt_path: "system_prompts/system_prompt_for_product_XYZZY"
  disable_query_system_prompt: true
```


# Usage

```
usage: lightspeed_stack.py [-h] [-v] [-d] [-c CONFIG_FILE]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -v, --verbose         make it verbose
  -d, --dump-configuration
                        dump actual configuration into JSON file and quit
  -c CONFIG_FILE, --config CONFIG_FILE
                        path to configuration file (default: lightspeed-stack.yaml)

```

## Make targets

```
Usage: make <OPTIONS> ... <TARGETS>

Available targets are:

run                               Run the service locally
test-unit                         Run the unit tests
test-integration                  Run integration tests tests
test-e2e                          Run BDD tests for the service
check-types                       Checks type hints in sources
security-check                    Check the project for security issues
format                            Format the code into unified format
schema                            Generate OpenAPI schema file
requirements.txt                  Generate requirements.txt file containing hashes for all non-devel packages
shellcheck                        Run shellcheck
help                              Show this help screen
```

## Running Linux container image

Stable release images are tagged with versions like `0.1.0`. Tag `latest` always points to latest stable release.

Development images are build from main branch every time a new pull request is merged. Image tags for dev images use
the template `dev-YYYYMMMDDD-SHORT_SHA` e.g. `dev-20250704-eaa27fb`.

Tag `dev-latest` always points to the latest dev image built from latest git.

To pull and run the image with own configuration:

1. `podman pull quay.io/lightspeed-core/lightspeed-stack:IMAGE_TAG`
1. `podman run -it -p 8080:8080 -v my-lightspeed-stack-config.yaml:/app-root/lightspeed-stack.yaml:Z quay.io/lightspeed-core/lightspeed-stack:IMAGE_TAG`
1. Open `localhost:8080` in your browser

If a connection in your browser does not work please check that in the config file `host` option looks like: `host: 0.0.0.0`.

# Endpoints

The service provides health check endpoints that can be used for monitoring, load balancing, and orchestration systems like Kubernetes.

## Readiness Endpoint

**Endpoint:** `GET /v1/readiness`

The readiness endpoint checks if the service is ready to handle requests by verifying the health status of all configured LLM providers.

**Response:**
- **200 OK**: Service is ready - all providers are healthy
- **503 Service Unavailable**: Service is not ready - one or more providers are unhealthy

**Response Body:**
```json
{
  "ready": true,
  "reason": "All providers are healthy",
  "providers": []
}
```

**Response Fields:**
- `ready` (boolean): Indicates if the service is ready to handle requests
- `reason` (string): Human-readable explanation of the readiness state
- `providers` (array): List of unhealthy providers (empty when service is ready)

## Liveness Endpoint

**Endpoint:** `GET /v1/liveness`

The liveness endpoint performs a basic health check to verify the service is alive and responding.

**Response:**
- **200 OK**: Service is alive

**Response Body:**
```json
{
  "alive": true
}
```

# Contributing

* See [contributors](CONTRIBUTING.md) guide.

# License

Published under the Apache 2.0 License



# Additional tools

## Utility to generate OpenAPI schema

This script re-generated OpenAPI schema for the Lightspeed Service REST API.

### Path

[scripts/generate_openapi_schema.py](scripts/generate_openapi_schema.py)

### Usage

```
make schema
```
